As a child, Bruce Wayne (Christian Bale) falls into an abandoned well filled with bats, causing him to develop a phobia, and later witnesses his parents' murder at the hands of mugger Joe Chill. Years later, Chill is granted parole in exchange for agreeing to testify against crime boss Carmine Falcone.Bruce, now a young man, goes to the courthouse intending to shoot Chill, but one of Falcone's assassins does so first. Bruce confides in his childhood friend Rachel Dawes (Katie Holmes), now a Gotham City district attorney, who is disgusted by Bruce's desire for vengeance. Bruce leaves Gotham to learn the ways of the criminal underworld, in hopes of learning skills that will allow him to return to Gotham and free it from the crime and corruption that threatens to consume it. In a Bhutanese prison, he meets Ducard, who offers to train him as a ninja of the League of Shadows led by Ra's Al Ghul. As he completes his training, Bruce learns of the League's true intentions: to liberate Gotham from the evils that plague it by destroying the city. He burns down the League's temple, killing Ra's (Liam Neeson) in the process, while saving the life of Ducard.Bruce returns to Gotham. While publicly posing as a reckless playboy, he takes an interest in his family's company, Wayne Enterprises, a technology and defense conglomerate run by the unscrupulous CEO William Earle, who intends to take the company public. Bruce meets Lucius Fox, who introduces him to several of Wayne's experimental prototype technologies, including an armored car and protective bodysuit, which Bruce uses to form his crime-fighting persona, Batman. As Batman, Bruce intercepts an illegal drug shipment, empowering Sgt. Jim Gordon and the Gotham police to arrest the previously untouchable Falcone. Meanwhile, a Wayne Enterprises cargo ship is raided and an experimental weapon is stolen, a "Microwave Emitter" that uses microwaves to vaporize an enemy's water supply.Back in Gotham, Falcone and his henchmen are declared mentally unfit for trial and transferred to Arkham Asylum by the corrupt Dr. Jonathan Crane, who had been using Falcone to import a dangerous hallucinogenic drug that causes severe psychosis. Crane exposes Falcone to the toxin while wearing a burlap mask, driving Falcone mad with fear of the "Scarecrow." While investigating Crane, Batman is also exposed to the drug and is rescued by Alfred and given an antidote by Fox. Rachel goes to Arkham, where Crane reveals that he has been dumping the toxin into Gotham's water supply before dosing her with it. She is rescued by Batman, who exposes Crane to the toxin and interrogates him. Crane reveals that the toxin is harmless in liquid form and only dangerous if inhaled. Batman inoculates Rachel and gives her two vials of the antidote, one for Sgt. Gordon and one for mass production.At his birthday celebration at Wayne Manor, Bruce is confronted by Ducard, who reveals himself to be the real Ra's Al Ghul. Bruce fakes a drunken tirade to get rid of his guests, leaving him alone with Ra's and his ninjas. Ra's reveals the League's plan to destroy Gotham: having stolen the Microwave Emitter and conspired with Crane, they intend to vaporize the city's toxin-riddled water supply, creating mass hysteria and violence. The League sets fire to the mansion and Bruce is nearly trapped inside but is saved by Alfred. As the League begins unleashing the toxin, Batman rescues Rachel from a drug-induced mob and reveals his true identity to her. He entrusts Sgt. Gordon with the Batmobile and pursues Ra's, who is using Gotham's train system to deliver the weapon throughout the city. Batman confronts Ra's on the train and escapes just as Gordon uses the Batmobile to destroy the elevated tracks, leaving Ra's to die in the ensuing crash.Batman becomes a public hero, but simultaneously loses Rachel, who cannot bring herself to love both Bruce and Batman. Bruce buys a controlling stake in the now publicly-traded Wayne Enterprises, fires Earle, and replaces him with Fox. Jim Gordon is promoted to Lieutenant. He shows Batman the new Bat-Signal and mentions a new costumed criminal who leaves Joker cards at crime scenes. Batman promises to investigate, and disappears into the night.